CITY

Kauai

Kaua?i or Kauai[3] ( /k?.'wa?.i?/; Hawaiian: [k?u'w??i]), known as Taua?i in the ancient Kaua'i dialect, is geologically the oldest of the main Hawaiian Islands. With an area of 562.3 square miles (1,456.4 km2), it is the fourth largest of the main islands in the Hawaiian archipelago, and the 21st largest island in the United States.[4] Known also as the "Garden Isle", Kaua?i lies 105 miles (169 km) across the Kaua?i Channel, northwest of O?ahu. This island is the site of Waimea Canyon State Park.

The United States Census Bureau defines Kaua?i as Census Tracts 401 through 409 of Kaua?i County, Hawai?i, which is all of the county except for the islands of Ka?ula, Lehua, and Ni?ihau. The 2000 census population of Kaua?i (the island) was 58,303.[5]




Native Hawaiian tradition indicates the name's origin in the legend of Hawai?iloa — the Polynesian navigator attributed with discovery of the Hawaiian Islands. The story relates how he named the island of Kaua?i after a favorite son; therefore a possible translation of Kaua?i is "place around the neck", meaning how a father would carry a favorite child. Another possible translation is "food season."[6]

Kaua?i was known for its distinct dialect of the Hawaiian language that is still spoken on the neighboring island of Ni?ihau. Whereas the standard language today is based on the dialect of Hawai?i island, which has the sound [k] at the beginning of words, the Kaua?i dialect was known for pronouncing this as [t]. In effect, Kaua?i dialect retained the old pan-Polynesian /t/, while 'standard' Hawai?i dialect has innovated and changed it to the [k]. Therefore, the native name for Kaua?i was Taua?i, and the major settlement of Kapa?a would have been called Tapa?a.




Kaua?i's origins are volcanic, the island having been formed by the passage of the Pacific plate over the Hawaii hotspot. At approximately six million years old, it is the oldest of the main islands. The highest peak on this mountainous island is Kawaikini at 5,243 feet (1,598 m).[7] The second highest peak is Mount Wai?ale?ale near the center of the island, 5,148 feet (1,569 m) above sea level. One of the wettest spots on earth, with an annual average rainfall of 460 inches (1,200 cm), is located on the east side of Mount Wai?ale?ale. The high annual rainfall has eroded deep valleys in the central mountains, carving out canyons with many scenic waterfalls. On the west side of the island, Waimea town is located at the mouth of the Waimea River, whose flow formed Waimea Canyon, one of the world's most scenic canyons, and which is part of Waimea Canyon State Park. At 3,000 feet (914 m) deep, Waimea Canyon is often referred to as "The Grand Canyon of the Pacific". The Na Pali Coast is a center for recreation in a wild setting, including kayaking past the beaches, or hiking on the trail along the coastal cliffs. [8]





In 1778, captain James Cook arrived at Waimea Bay, the first European known to have reached the Hawaiian islands, which he named after his patron the Earl of Sandwich.

During the reign of King Kamehameha, the islands of Kaua?i and Ni?ihau were the last Hawaiian Islands to join his Kingdom of Hawai?i. Their ruler, Kaumuali?i, resisted Kamehameha for years. King Kamehameha twice prepared a huge armada of ships and canoes to take the islands by force, and twice failed; once due to a storm, and once due to an epidemic. In the face of the threat of a further invasion, however, Kaumuali?i decided to join the kingdom without bloodshed, and became Kamehameha's vassal in 1810, ceding the island to the Kingdom of Hawai?i upon his death in 1824.

In 1815-17, Kaumuali?i led secret negotiations with representatives of the Russian-American Company in an attempt to gain Russia's military support against Kamehameha; however, the negotiations folded and the Russians were forced to abandon all of their presence in Kaua?i, including Fort Elizabeth, after it was revealed that they did not have the support of Tsar Alexander I.

In 1835 Old Koloa Town opened a sugar mill. Missionaries also came in the 19th century.





Tourism is Kaua?i's largest industry. In 2007, 1,271,000 visitors came to Kaua?i. The two largest groups were from the United States (84% of all visitors) and Japan (3%).[9] As of 2003, there were a total of approximately 27,000 jobs on Kaua?i, of which the largest sector was accommodation/food services (26%, 6,800 jobs) followed by government (15%) and retail (14.5%), with agriculture accounting for just 2.9% (780 jobs) and educational services providing just 0.7% (183 jobs).[10] In terms of income, the various sectors that constitute the visitors industry accounted for one third of Kauai's income.[10] On the other hand, employment is dominated by small businesses, with 87% of all nonfarm businesses having fewer than 20 employees.[10] As of 2003, Kaua?i's unemployment rate was 3.9%, compared to 3.0% for the entire state and 5.7% for the United States as a whole; and, Kaua?i's poverty rate was 10.5%, compared to the State's 10.7%.[10]

As of mid-2004, the median price of a single-family home was $528,000, a 40% increase over 2003. As of 2003, Kaua?i's percentage of home ownership, 48%, was significantly lower than the State's 64%, and vacation homes were a far larger part of the housing stock than the State-wide percentage (Kaua?i 15%, State 5%).[10]

In the past, sugar plantations were Kaua?i's most important industry. In 1835 the first sugar plantation was founded on Kaua?i and for the next century the industry would dominate the economy of Hawaii.[11] The minimum wage law (Federal Labor Standards Act) and protection of the rights of workers to unionize led to the closure of most of the sugar plantations.[citation needed] Most of that land is now used for ranching.[9] Kaua?i's sole remaining sugar operation, the 118-year-old Gay & Robinson Plantation plans to transform itself into a manufacturer of sugar-cane ethanol.[9]

Land in Kaua?i is very fertile and is home to many varieties of fruit and other crops. Guava, coffee, sugarcane, mango, banana, papaya, avocado, star fruit, kava and pineapple are all cultivated.





Hawaii Standard Time is observed on Kaua'i year-round. During DST, for example, the time on Kaua'i is three hours behind the West Coast of the United States and six hours behind the East Coast.[12]

The city of Lihu?e, on the island's southeast coast, is the seat of Kaua?i County and the second largest city on the island. Kapa?a, on the "Coconut Coast" (site of an old coconut plantation) about 6 miles (9.7 km) north of Lihu?e, has a population of nearly 10,000, or about 50% greater than Lihu?e. Waimea, once the capital of Kaua?i on the island's southwest side, was the first place in Hawai?i visited by British explorer Captain James Cook in 1778.

Kaua?i is home to thousands of wild chickens, who have few natural predators. Kaua?i's chickens originated from the original Polynesian settlers, who brought them as a food source. They have since bred with European chickens that have gotten free from farms and cock-fighting breeders.

Kaua?i is home to the U.S. Navy's "Barking Sands" Pacific Missile Range Facility, on the sunny and dry western shore.

HF ("shortwave") radio station WWVH, sister station to WWV and WWVB in Ft. Collins, Colorado, is located on the west coast of Kauai about 5 km south of Barking Sands. WWVH, WWV and WWVB are operated by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology, broadcasting standard time and frequency information to the public.

The Kaua?i Heritage Center of Hawaiian Culture and the Arts was founded in 1998. Their mission is to nurture a greater sense of appreciation and respect for the Hawaiian culture. They offer classes in Hawaiian language, hula, lei and cordage making, the lunar calendar and chanting. Plus trips to cultural sites.





Cities and towns on Kaua?i range in population from the roughly 9,500 people in Kapa?a to tiny hamlets. The list below lists the larger or more notable of those from the northernmost end of Hawaii Route 560 to the western terminus of Hawaii Route 50

Ha?ena

Wainiha

Hanalei

Princeville

Kalihiwai

Kilauea

Anahola

Kapa?a

Wailua

Hanama?ulu

Lihu?e

Po?ipu

Koloa

Lawa?i

Kalaheo

?Ele?ele

Hanapepe

Kaumakani

Waimea

Kekaha





Located on the eastern end of the island, Lihue Airport is the aviation gateway to Kaua?i. Lihu?e Airport has direct routes to Honolulu, Kahului/Maui, the United States mainland and Vancouver, Canada.

Several state highways serve Kaua?i County:

Hawaii Route 50, also known as Kaumuali?i Highway, is a thirty-three mile road that stretches from Hawaii Route 56 at the junction of Rice Street in Lihu?e to a point approximately 1/5 mile north of the northernmost entrance of the Pacific Missile Range Facility on the far western shore.

Hawaii Route 58 stretches two miles (3 km) from Route 50 in Lihu?e to the junction of Wapaa Road with Hawaii 51 near Nawiliwili Harbor on Kaua?i.

Hawaii Route 56, also known as Kuhio Highway, runs twenty-eight miles from Hawaii Route 50 at the junction of Rice Street in Lihu?e to the junction of Hawaii Route 560 in Princeville.

Hawaii Route 560 passes ten miles (16 km) from the junction of Route 56 in Princeville and dead ends at Ke?e Beach in Haena State Park.

Other major highways that link other parts of the Island to the main highways of Kaua?i are:

Hawaii Route 55 covers 7.6 miles (12.2 km) from the junction of Route 50 in Kekaha to meet with Hawaii Route 550 south of Koke?e State Park in the Waimea Canyon.

Hawaii Route 550 spans 15 miles (24 km) from Route 50 in Waimea to Koke?e State Park.

Hawaii Route 540 goes four miles (6 km) from Route 50 in Kalaheo to Route 50 in Ele?ele. The road is mainly an access to residential areas and Kaua?i Coffee.

Hawaii Route 530, also called Koloa Road, stretches 3.4 miles (5.5 km) from Route 50 between Kalaheo and Lawai to Route 520 in Koloa. The road is mainly an alternative to Route 520 for travel from the west side to Po?ipu.

Hawaii Route 520 runs five miles (8 km) from the "Tunnel of Trees" at Route 50 to Po?ipu on the south shore.

Hawaii Route 570 covers one mile (1.6 km) from Route 56 in Lihu?e to Lihu?e Airport.

Hawaii Route 580 spans five miles (8 km) from Route 56 in Wailua to where the road is no longer serviced just south of the Wailua Reservoir.

Hawaii Route 581 passes five miles (8 km) from Route 580 in the Wailua Homesteads to a roundabout just west of Kapa?a Town.

Hawaii Route 583, also known as Maalo Road, stretches 3.9 miles (6.3 km) from Route 56 just north of Lihu?e to dead-end at Wailua Falls Overlook in the interior.

The Kaua'i Bus is the public transportation service of the County of Kaua?i. It is operated by Roberts Hawaii.

The island of Kaua?i has been featured in more than seventy Hollywood movies and television shows, including the musical South Pacific and Disney's 2002 animated feature film and television series Lilo & Stitch, Lilo & Stitch 2: Stitch Has a Glitch, Stitch! The Movie, and Lilo & Stitch: The Series. Scenes from South Pacific were filmed in the vicinity of Hanalei. Waimea Canyon was used in the filming of the 1993 film Jurassic Park. Parts of the island were also used for the opening scenes of Indiana Jones' Raiders of the Lost Ark. Other movies filmed here include Six Days Seven Nights, the 2005 remake of King Kong and John Ford's 1963 film Donovan's Reef. Recent films include Tropic Thunder and a biopic of Bethany Hamilton entitled Soul Surfer. A scene in the opening credits of popular TV show M*A*S*H was filmed in Kauai (helicopter flying over mountain top). Some scenes from Just Go with It and Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides were also filmed in Kauai.

Parts of the 2002 film Dragonfly were filmed there (although the people and the land were presented as South American) and the producers hired extras (at least three with speaking parts) from the ancient Hawai?ian native population, which seeks to preserve its cultural heritage,[13] including the pre-USA name of these two islands, Atooi or Taua?i.[14][15]

Major parts of the 1966 Elvis Presley film Paradise, Hawaiian Style were filmed at various locations on Kauai. One of the most famous was the Coco Palms resort. During Hurricane Iniki, the Coco Palms was decimated and never rebuilt, but the film showcases the resort at its peak.

The Descendants, a film by Alexander Payne released in November 2011 and featuring George Clooney as lead actor, has major parts shot in Kauai, where the main character and his cousins own ancestral lands which they are considering selling. The film is based on the 2007 novel by the Hawaiian writer Kaui Hart Hemmings