Budapest



Budapest ( ,   or  ;  ; names in other languages) is the capital of Hungary.     As the largest city of Hungary, it is the country's principal political, cultural, commercial, industrial, and transportation centre.    In 2011, Budapest had 1,733,685 inhabitants,    down from its 1989 peak of 2,113,645    due to suburbanization.    The Budapest Commuter Area is home to 3,284,110 people.  History of the Budapest Commuter Association (English))   Settlements of the Budapest Commuter Area (Hungarian)  The city covers an area of    within the city limits. Budapest became a single city occupying both banks of the river Danube with a unification on 17 November 1873 of west-bank Buda and Óbuda with east-bank Pest.    Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 15.

The history of Budapest began with Aquincum, originally a Celtic settlement     that became the Roman capital of Lower Pannonia.    Hungarians arrived in the territory    in the 9th century. Their first settlement was pillaged by the Mongols in 1241-42.    The re-established town became one of the centres of Renaissance humanist culture    in the 15th century.    Following the Battle of Mohács and nearly 150 years of Ottoman rule, Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 15  development of the region entered a new age of prosperity in the 18th and 19th centuries, and Budapest became a global city after the 1873 unification.    It also became the second capital of Austria-Hungary, a great power that dissolved in 1918. Budapest was the focal point of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, the Hungarian Soviet Republic of 1919, Operation Panzerfaust in 1944, the Battle of Budapest of 1945, and the Revolution of 1956.

Cited as one of the most beautiful cities in Europe,      its extensive number of World Heritage Site's includes the banks of the Danube, the Buda Castle Quarter, Andrássy Avenue, Heroes' Square and the Millennium Underground Railway, the second oldest in the world.       Other highlights include a total of 80 geothermal springs,    the world's largest thermal water cave system,     largest synagogue, and third largest Parliament building. The city attracts about 2.7 million tourists a year, making it the 37th most popular city in the world according to Euromonitor.

Considered a financial hub in Central Europe,      the city ranked 3rd (out of 65 cities) on Mastercard's Emerging Markets Index,    and ranked as the most livable Central/Eastern European city on EIU's quality of life index.       It is also ranked as "Europe's 7th most idyllic place to live" by Forbes,    and as the 9th most beautiful city in the world by UCityGuides.  /ref> It is the highest ranked Central/Eastern European city on Innovation Cities' Top 100 index.

Budapest is home to the headquarters of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT),    and the first foreign office of the China Investment Promotion Agency (CIPA).



The name "Budapest" is the composition of the city names "Buda" and "Pest", since they were united (together with Óbuda) to become a single city in 1873. One of the first occurrences of the combined name "Buda-Pest" was in 1831 in the book "Világ" ("World" / "Light"), written by Count István Széchenyi  Bácskai Vera: Széchenyi tervei Pest-Buda felemelésére és szépítésére .

The origins of the words "Buda" and "Pest" are obscure. According to chronicles from the Middle Ages, the name "Buda" comes from the name of its founder, Bleda (Buda), the brother of the Hunnic ruler Attila. The theory that "Buda" was named after a person is also supported by modern scholars Kiss Lajos: Földrajzi nevek etimológiai szótára. Budapest: Akadémiai. 1978. 131–132. . An alternative explanation suggests that "Buda" derives from the Slavic word "вода, voda" ("water"), a translation of the Latin name "Aquincum", which was the main Roman settlement in the region Györffy György, Pest-Buda kialakulása: Budapest története a honfoglalástól az Árpád-kor végi székvárossá alakulásig, Budapest, Akadémiai, 1997, 242. .

There are also several theories about the origin of the name "Pest". One of the theories Gudmund Schütte, Ptolemy's Maps of Northern Europe (The Royal Danish Geographical Society: Copenhagen, 1917). p. 101  claims that the word "Pest" comes from the Roman times, since there was a fortress "Contra-Aquincum" in this region which was referred to as "Pession" ("Πέσσιον", iii.7.§2) by Ptolemaios William Smith (ed.), A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (London : I.B. Tauris, 2006) [Facsim. of ed. published: London : John Murray, 1872.] . According to another theory, "Pest" originates from the Slavic word for cave "пещера, peshtera" or from the word for oven "пещ, pesht", in reference to a cave where fires burned or to a local limekiln   . In the old-Hungarian language there was a similar word meaning oven/cave and the original old-German name of this region was also "Ofen". Later, the German "Ofen" referred to the Buda side.




Buda Castle during the Middle Ages.
The first settlement on the territory of Budapest was built by Celts  before 1 AD. It was later occupied by the Romans. The Roman settlement - Aquincum - became the main city of Lower Pannonia  in 106 AD.  The Romans constructed roads, amphitheaters, baths and houses with heated floors in this fortified military camp.

The peace treaty of 829 added Pannonia to Bulgaria due to the victory of Bulgarian army of Omurtag over Holy Roman Empire of Louis the Pious. Budapest arose out of two Bulgarian military frontier  fortresses Buda and Pest, situated on the two banks of Danube. B. Dimitrov, Bulgarians- Civilizers of the slavs, p.48  Hungarians led by Árpád settled in the territory at the end of the 9th century,  Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, Chronology pp. 12  and a century later officially founded the Kingdom of Hungary.  Research places the probable residence of the Árpáds as an early place of central power near what became Budapest. Molnar, A Concise History of Hungary, p. 14   The Tatar invasion in the 13th century quickly proved that defence is difficult on a plain.   King Béla IV of Hungary therefore ordered the construction of reinforced stone walls around the towns  and set his own royal palace  on the top of the protecting hills of Buda. In 1361  it became the capital of Hungary.

The cultural role of Buda was particularly significant during the reign of Matthias Corvinus of Hungary.  The Italian Renaissance had a great influence on the city.  His library, the Bibliotheca Corviniana,  was Europe's greatest collection of historical chronicles and philosophic and scientific works in the 15th century, and second only in size to the Vatican Library.  After the foundation of the first Hungarian university in Pécs in 1367,    the second one was established in Óbuda in 1395.  The first Hungarian book was printed in Buda in 1473.    Buda had about 5,000 inhabitants around 1500. Southeastern Europe under Ottoman rule, 1354-1804,  Peter F. Sugar, page 88

Hungarian Royal Palace in 1930.
During the Hungarian Republic of Councils in 1919, the Heroes' Square  was completely covered by red textile and a statue of Marx was erected.
The Ottomans pillaged Buda in 1526, besieged it in 1529, and finally occupied it in 1541. The Turkish occupation lasted for more than 140 years.  The Turks constructed many fine bathing facilities within the city.  Under Ottoman rule many Christians became Muslim. By 1547 the number of Christians was down to about a thousand, and by 1647 it had fallen to only about seventy.  The unoccupied western part of the country became part of the Habsburg Empire as Royal Hungary.

In 1686, two years after the unsuccessful siege of Buda, a renewed campaign was started to enter the Hungarian capital. This time, the Holy League's army was twice as large, containing over 74,000 men, including German, Croat, Dutch, Hungarian, English, Spanish, Czech, Italian, French, Burgundian, Danish and Swedish soldiers, along with other Europeans as volunteers, artilleryman, and officers, the Christian forces reconquered Buda, and in the next few years, all of the former Hungarian lands, except areas near Timişoara (Temesvár), were taken from the Turks. In the 1699 Treaty of Karlowitz these territorial changes were officially recognized, and in 1718 the entire Kingdom of Hungary was removed from Ottoman rule.

The city was destroyed during the battle.  Hungary was then incorporated into the Habsburg Empire.

The 19th century was dominated by the Hungarian struggle for independence  and modernization. The national insurrection against the Habsburgs began in the Hungarian capital in 1848 and was defeated a little more than a year later.

The Hungarian State Opera House, built in the time of Austria-Hungary.
1867 was the year of Reconciliation that brought about the birth of Austria-Hungary.
Cutaway Drawing of Millennium Underground in Budapest (1894–1896) which was the second underground in the world.

This made Budapest the twin capital of a dual monarchy. It was this compromise which opened the second great phase of development in the history of Budapest, lasting until World War I. In 1873 Buda and Pest were officially merged with the third part, Óbuda (Ancient Buda), thus creating the new metropolis of Budapest. The dynamic Pest grew into the country's administrative, political, economic, trade and cultural hub. Budapest went from about 80% German-speaking in 1848 to about 80% Hungarian-speaking in 1880.  Nationalism and the Problem of Inclusion in Hungary. Alice Freifeld , Associate Professor of History at the University of Florida, and a former Title VIII-supported EES Short-term Scholar.  The capital, Budapest, was 23% Jewish. Due to the prosperity and the large Jewish community of the city, Budapest was often called the "Jewish Mecca" Encyclopædia Britannica 1911, Budapest article 
World War I brought the Golden Age to an end. In 1918 Austria-Hungary lost the war and collapsed; Hungary declared itself an independent republic. In 1920 the Treaty of Trianon finalized the country's partition, as a result, Hungary lost over two-thirds of its territory, about two-thirds of its inhabitants under the treaty including 3.3 million out of 10 million ethnic Hungarians.

In 1944, towards the end of World War II, Budapest was partly destroyed by British and American air raids. From 24 December 1944 to 13 February 1945, the city was besieged during the Battle of Budapest. Budapest suffered major damage caused by the attacking Soviet and Romanian troops and the defending German and Hungarian troops. All bridges were destroyed by the Germans. More than 38,000 civilians lost their lives during the conflict.
Hungarian Jewish WWII Memorial Between 20% and 40% of Greater Budapest's 250,000 Jewish inhabitants died through Nazi and Arrow Cross Party genocide during 1944 and early 1945.       Despite this, modern day Budapest has the highest number of Jewish citizens per capita of any European city. The Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg managed to save the lives of tens of thousands of Jews in Budapest by giving them Swedish passports and taking them under his consular protection. " Raoul Wallenberg". Jewish Virtual Library.

In 1949, Hungary was declared a communist People's Republic. The new Communist government considered the buildings like the Buda Castle symbols of the former regime, and during the 1950s the palace was gutted and all the interiors were destroyed.

In 1956, peaceful demonstrations in Budapest led to the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution. The Leadership collapsed after mass demonstrations began on 23 October, but Soviet tanks entered Budapest to crush the revolt. Fighting continued until early November, leaving more than 3000 dead.

From the 1960s to the late 1980s Hungary was often satirically referred to as "the happiest barrack" within the Eastern bloc, and much of the wartime damage to the city was finally repaired. Work on Erzsébet Bridge, the last to be rebuilt, was finished in 1965. In the early 1970s, Budapest Metro's East-West M2 line was first opened, followed by the M3 line in 1982. In 1987, Buda Castle and the banks of the Danube were included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites. Andrassy Avenue (including the Millennium Underground Railway, Hősök tere and Városliget) was added to the UNESCO list in 2002. In the 1980s the city's population reached 2.1 million. In recent times a significant decrease in population occurred mainly due to a massive movement to the neighbouring agglomeration in Pest county.
In the last decades of the 20th century the political changes of 1989-90 concealed changes in civil society and along the streets of  Budapest. The monuments of the dictatorship were taken down from public places, into Memento Park. In the first 20 years of the new democracy the development of the city was managed by Gábor Demszky.



Aquincum Museum (Aquincum was the capital of Pannonia.)
The tomb of the Turkish dervish Gül Baba in Budapest
The Recapture of Buda Castle (1686)
Buda and Pest (c. 1850)
Budapest view from observatory (c. 1840), Drawing by W.H. Bartlett
Andrássy Avenue (1875)
Buda Castle
Parliament Building 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences
Gresham Palace
Gerbeaud Confectionery



Budapest as seen from SPOT satellite.
The 525 km 2  area of Budapest lies in central Hungary surrounded by settlements of the agglomeration in Pest county. The capital extends 25 and 29 kilometers in the north-south, east-west direction respectively. The Danube enters the city from the north; later it encircles two islands, Óbuda Island and Margaret Island.  The third island Csepel Island is the largest of the Budapest Danube islands, however only its northernmost tip is within city limits. The river that separates the two parts of the city is only   wide at its narrowest point in Budapest. Pest lies on the flat terrain of the Great Plain while Buda is rather hilly.  Pest's terrain rises with a slight eastward gradient, so the easternmost parts of the city lie at the same altitude as Buda's smallest hills, notably Gellért Hill and Castle Hill. The Buda hills consist mainly of limestone and dolomite, the water created speleothems, the most famous ones being the Pálvölgyi cave and the Szemlőhegyi cave. The hills were formed in the Triassic Era. The highest point of the hills and of Budapest is János hill, at   above sea level. The lowest point is the line of the Danube which is   above sea level. The forests of Buda hills are environmentally protected.




The city has a temperate, transitional climate - somewhere between the mild, snowy weather of Transdanubia, the variable continental climate of the flat and open Great Plain to the east and the almost sub-Mediterranean weather of the south.



City Park (Városliget) and Margit Island are perfect places to find some green area in the city. In the City Park in winter you can enjoy ice skating on one of the largest artificial ice surfaces in the world. Margaret Island offers a wide range of sports from running and cycling to tennis or swimming in the Alfréd Hajós Swimming Center where Budapest proudly hosted the LEN European Aquatics Championships in 2006 and 2010.
Budapest was the host for the ITU Triathlon World Championships 2010, too.
The 2011 IIHF World Championship (Division I, Group A) and Athletics - 2012 European Cross Country Championships will be held there.

The city is the proud home for many Olympic, World, and Europen Championship winners and medalists. The city's largest football stadium is named after the world famous Ferenc Puskás; top class player of Real Madrid and the Hungarian National Team, who was recognized as the top scorer of the 20th century and who the FIFA's Puskás Award    (Ballon d'Or) was named after. (read more about the award { |here})

The city is also home to Hungarian bandy. The Bandy World Championship for women 2007     and the Bandy World Championship 2004 /B-group/ were held here.  /ref>




Budapest statisztikai évkönyve 1944-1946 (Statistical Yearbook of Budapest, 1944-1946), p. 12, Hungarian Central Statistical Office




A KSH report showed that the proportion of Roma in Budapest increased from 2% in 1990 to 4.6% in 2009.

Whilst only 1.7% of the population of Hungary in 2009 were foreigners,  43% of them lived in Budapest,  making them 4.4% of the city's population.   Nearly two-thirds of foreigners living in Hungary were under 40.  The primary motivation for this age group living in Hungary was employment.




Originally Budapest had 10 districts after coming into existence upon the unification of the three cities in 1873. On 1 January 1950 Budapest was united with several neighboring towns and the number of its districts was raised to 22 (Greater Budapest). At that time there were changes both in the order of districts and in their sizes. Now there are 23 districts, 6 in Buda, 16 in Pest and 1 on Csepel Island between them. Each district can be associated with one or more city parts named after former towns within Budapest. The city centre itself in a broader sense comprises the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 13th districts on the Pest side, and the 1st, 2nd, 11th and 12th on the Buda side of the city.



ING
Nearly all branches of industry can be found in Budapest.  Main products are communication engineering and computer appliances, electric machines, incandescent lamps (General Electric). Pharmaceutical industry is also important, well-known Egis, Richter Gedeon and Chinoin companies are Hungarian, Teva also has a division here. The Malév Hunagrian Airlines is based in Budapest.

Industry is rather in the suburbs, the centre is place for the main national and international service and financial companies like Hungarian Telekom, General Electric, Vodafone, Telenor, Erste Bank, CIB Bank, K&H Bank&Insurance, UniCredit, Budapest Bank, Generali Providencia Insurance, ING, Aegon Insurance, Allianz. Regional base of Volvo Co., Saab, Ford, GE are in Budapest. 
MOL Hungarian Oil and Gas Company which with its Subsidiaries, is a leading integrated oil and gas company in Central & Eastern Europe, and OTP Bank which is the biggest Hungarian bank, with branches in 8 other countries as well, are based in the capital.

Budapest is the centre of services, financial counselling, money transactions, commercial and estate services. Trade and logistic services are well-developed. Tourism and catering also deserve mention, the capital being home to thousands of restaurants, bars, coffee houses and party places.



Hungarian Parliament Building

The neo-Gothic Parliament, containing amongst other things the Hungarian Crown Jewels.
Saint Stephen's Basilica, where the Holy Right Hand of the founder of Hungary, King Saint Stephen is on display.
The Hungarian cuisine and café culture: for example, Gerbeaud Café, and the Százéves, Biarritz, Fortuna, Alabárdos, Arany Szarvas, Kárpátia and the world famous Mátyás Pince Restaurants.
There are Roman remains at the Aquincum Museum, and historic furniture at the Nagytétény Castle Museum, just 2 out of 223 museums in Budapest.

The Castle Hill, the River Danube embankments and the whole of Andrássy út have been officially recognized as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

Castle Hill and the Castle District; there are three churches here, six museums, and a host of interesting buildings, streets and squares. The former Royal Palace is one of the symbols of Hungary – and has been the scene of battles and wars ever since the 13th century. Nowadays it houses two impressive museums and the National Széchenyi Library. The nearby Sándor Palace contains the offices and official residence of the President of Hungary. The seven-hundred year-old Matthias Church is one of the jewels of Budapest. Next to it is an equestrian statue of the first king of Hungary, King Saint Stephen, and behind that is the Fisherman's Bastion, from where opens out a panoramic view of the whole city.  Statues of the Turul, the mythical guardian bird of Hungary, can be found in both the Castle District and the Twelfth District.

The Holy Crown, a key symbol of Hungary
In Pest, arguably the most important sight is Andrássy út. As far as Kodály Körönd and Oktogon both sides are lined with large shops and flats built close together. Between there and Heroes’ Square the houses are detached and altogether grander. Under the whole runs continental Europe’s oldest Underground railway, most of whose stations retain their original appearance. Heroes’ Square is dominated by the Millenary Monument, with the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in front. To the sides are the Museum of Fine Arts and the Kunsthalle Budapest, and behind City Park opens out, with Vajdahunyad Castle. One of the jewels of Andrássy út is the Hungarian State Opera House. Statue Park, a theme park with striking statues of the Communist era, is located just outside the main city and is accessible by public transport.

The city is home to the largest synagogue in Europe (Dohány Street Synagogue),    and second largest working in the World .    The synagogue is located in the Jewish district taking up several blocks in central Budapest bordered by Király utca, Wesselényi utca, Grand Boulevard (Budapest) and Bajcsy Zsilinszky road.  The city is also proud at the largest medicinal bath in Europe (Széchenyi Medicinal Bath) and the third largest Parliament building in the world, once the largest in the world. The third largest church in Europe (Esztergom Basilica) and the second largest Baroque castle in the world (Gödöllő) are in the vicinity.

The world's largest panorama photograph was created in (and of) Budapest in 2010.

File:Budapest castle night 5.jpg|Buda Castle
File:Museum Fine Arts01.jpg|Museum of Fine Arts
File:Basilique Saint-Étienne de Pest.jpg|Saint Stephen's Basilica
File:Buda Castles-Matthias Church.jpg|Matthias Church
File:Sunset over the Danube - Budapest - joiseyshowaa.jpg|Széchenyi Chain Bridge
File:03hősök tere.JPG|Heroes' Square with the Millenary Monument
File:04Pesti vigado.JPG|Vigadó Concert Hall
File:Mujegpalya Ice Rink.jpg|Vajdahunyad Castle
File:Szent Erzsebet-templom 01.jpg|Saint Elisabeth Church
File:Synagogue-Budapest.jpg|The Great Synagogue
File:Museum of Applied Arts (Budapest).jpg|Museum of Applied Arts
File:01New-York palota Budapest.JPG|New York Café
File:Hungariannationalmuseum100.jpg|Hungarian National Museum
File:Halászbástya Budapest.JPG|Fisherman's Bastion
File:Buda castle quarte.JPG|Holy Trinity's square
File:Budapestbudacastle100.jpg|Buda, Castle Hill
File:Budapest opera house.JPG|Andrássy Avenue, it was recognised as a World Heritage Site
File:Budapest deak palota.jpg|"Fashion Street"
File:07váci utca.JPG| Váci Street is one of the main shopping streets in Budapest.
File:Burgtheater Budapest Varszinhaz 2009 august.jpg|Castle Theatre
File:Hungarian National Theater Budapest.jpg|National Theatre
File:Estibp18.jpg|Buda Castle
File:Estibp37.jpg|Heroes' Square
File:Szabadsaghideeste3.jpg|Liberty Bridge
File:Budapešť, Belváros, pohled na centrum města.JPG|City of Budapest seen from Saint Stephen's Basilica



Margaret Island
Seven islands can be found on the Danube: Shipyard Island, Margaret Island, Csepel Island, Palotai-sziget (now a peninsula), Népsziget, Háros-sziget, and Molnár-sziget.

Notable islands include:
*Margaret Island is a   long island and   in area. The island mostly consists of a park and is a popular recreational area for tourists and locals alike. The island lies between bridges Margaret Bridge (south) and Árpád Bridge (north). Dance clubs, Swimming pools, an Aqua park, athletic and fitness centres, bicycle and running tracks can be found around the Island. During the day the island is occupied by people doing sports, or just resting. In the summer (generally on the weekends) mostly young people go to the island at night to party in its terraces, or to recreate with a bottle of alcohol on a bench or on the grass (this form of entertainment is sometimes referred to as bench-partying).
*Csepel Island ( ) is the largest island of the River Danube in Hungary. It is   long; its width is 6–8 km (3.75–5 mi) and its area comprises  , whereas only the northern tip is inside the city limits.
*Hajógyári-sziget ( , or Óbudai-sziget) is a man built island, located in the third district. This island hosts many activities such as: wake-boarding, jet-skiing during the day, and dance clubs during the night. This is the island where the famous Sziget Festival takes place, hosting hundreds of  performances per year and now around 400,000 visitors in its last edition. Many building projects are taking place to make this island into one of the biggest entertainment centres of Europe, the plan is to build Apartment buildings, hotels, casinos and a marina.
*Luppa-sziget is the smallest island of Budapest, located in the north region.
*Rock of Ínség can be found in the river Danube under the Gellért mountain, it can be seen just in a drought period when the river level is very low and this is a bad signal for a crop.



Rudas Baths is a thermal and medicinal bath that was first built in 1550
One of the reasons the Romans first colonized the area immediately to the west of the River Danube and established their regional capital at Aquincum (now part of Óbuda, in northern Budapest) is so that they could utilize and enjoy the thermal springs. There are still ruins visible today of the enormous baths that were built during that period. The new baths that were constructed during the Turkish period (1541–1686) served both bathing and medicinal purposes, and some of these are still in use to this day. Budapest gained its reputation as a city of spas in the 1920s, following the first realization of the economic potential of the thermal waters in drawing in visitors. Indeed, in 1934 Budapest was officially ranked as a "City of Spas". Today, the baths are mostly frequented by the older generation, as, with the exception of the “Magic Bath” and "Cinetrip" water discos, young people tend to prefer the lidos which are open in the summer.
Construction of the Király Baths started in 1565, and most of the present-day building dates from the Turkish period, including most notably the fine cupola-topped pool.

The Rudas Baths are centrally placed – in the narrow strip of land between Gellért Hill and the River Danube – and also an outstanding example of architecture dating from the Turkish period. The central feature is an octagonal pool over which light shines from a 10 m diameter cupola, supported by eight pillars.
Széchenyi Thermal Bath.

The Gellért Baths and Hotel were built in 1918, although there had once been Turkish baths on the site, and in the Middle Ages a hospital. In 1927 the Baths were extended to include the wave pool, and the effervescent bath was added in 1934. The well-preserved Art Nouveau interior includes colourful mosaics, marble columns, stained glass windows and statues.

The Lukács Baths are also in Buda and are also Turkish in origin, although they were only revived at the end of the 19th century. This was also when the spa and treatment centre were founded. There is still something of an atmosphere of fin-de-siècle about the place, and all around the inner courtyard there are marble tablets recalling the thanks of patrons who were cured there. Since the 1950s it has been regarded as a centre for intellectuals and artists.

The Széchenyi Baths are one of the largest bathing complexes in all Europe, and the only “old” medicinal baths to be found in the Pest side of the city. The indoor medicinal baths date from 1913 and the outdoor pools from 1927. There is an atmosphere of grandeur about the whole place with the bright, largest pools resembling aspects associated with Roman baths, the smaller bath tubs reminding one of the bathing culture of the Greeks, and the saunas and diving pools borrowed from traditions emanating in northern Europe. The three outdoor pools (one of which is a fun pool) are open all year, including winter. Indoors there are over ten separate pools, and a whole host of medical treatments is also available.




Budapest Ferenc Liszt International Airport.
Map of the Budapest Metro.
Budapest Liszt Ferenc International Airport, formerly called Budapest Ferihegy International Airport, which has 3 passenger terminals: Ferihegy 1, which tends to serve the many discount airlines now flying to and from Budapest, Ferihegy 2/A and Ferihegy 2/B. Terminal 3 is planned to be built. The airport is located to the east of the centre in the XVIII. district in Pestszentlőrinc. In March 2011, the Hungarian Government announced that the name of the Airport is to be changed from "Budapest Ferihegy International Airport" to "Budapest Liszt Ferenc International Airport". 
Megyeri Bridge, M0 motorway, north sector.
Budapest Castle Hill Funicular



Budapest is the most important Hungarian road terminus; most of the major highways end near the city-limits. The road system in the city is designed in a similar manner to that of Paris, with several ring roads, and avenues radiating out from the center.

Ring road (beltway) M0 around Budapest is nearly completed, with only one section missing on the west side due to local disputes. Currently the beltway is around 80 kilometers in length, and once finished it will be near 100 kilometers of highway in length.



Budapest public transport is provided by BKV,    the company operates buses, trolleybuses, trams, suburban railway lines, the metro, a boat service, a cogwheel railway, a funicular, and a chairlift, called Libegő.

Budapest's tram network is extensive, and reliable despite poor track infrastructure and an ageing fleet. Routes 4 and 6 combined form the busiest traditional city tram line in the world, with the world's longest passenger trams (  long  Siemens Combino) running at 60 to 90 second intervals at peak time and 3–4 minutes off-peak and usually packed with people.

Day services operate from 4:30 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. each day. Night traffic (a reduced overnight service) has a reputation for being excellent.

There are three metro lines and a fourth is currently under construction.  The Yellow line, built in 1896, is one of the oldest subway lines in the world, following the London Underground built in 1863.




Hungarian main-line railways are operated by MÁV. There are three main railway termini in Budapest, Keleti (eastbound), Nyugati (westbound), and Déli (southbound), operating both domestic and international rail services. Budapest was one of the main stops of the Orient Express until 2001, when the service was cut back to Paris-Vienna.
There is also a suburban rail service in and around Budapest, operated under the name HÉV.

File:Western Ralway Station Budapest.jpg|Budapest Western railway station ( )
File:Budapest East Station 2.jpg|Budapest East railway station ( )



The river Danube flows through Budapest on its way to the Black Sea. The river is easily navigable and so Budapest has historically been a major commercial port (at Csepel). In the summer months a scheduled hydrofoil service operates up the Danube to Vienna.



Beside metros, suburban rails, buses, trams and boats, there are a couple of less usual vehicles in Budapest:
* trolleybus  on several lines in Pest
* the Castle Hill Funicular between the Chain Bridge and Buda Castle
* cyclecar for rent in Margaret Island
* chairlift
* the Budapest Cog-wheel Railway
* children's railway

The latter three vehicles run among Buda hills.



Main Building of the BME. One of the oldest universities of technology in the World, founded in 1782.
Main Building of the Corvinus University of Budapest
Hungarian State Opera
Budapest is Hungary's main centre of education and home to numerous universities:

*Eötvös Loránd University
*Budapest Business School
*Central European University
*Budapest University of Technology and Economics
*Corvinus University of Budapest
*Semmelweis University (medical university)
*Szent István University
*Óbuda University
*Pázmány Péter Catholic University
*Károli Gáspár University of the Hungarian Reformed Church
*Jewish Theological Seminary – University of Jewish Studies
*International Business School-Budapest
*Andrássy Gyula German Language University of Budapest
*Moholy-Nagy University of Art and Design
*Liszt Ferenc Academy of Music



Budapest is twinned  with:

Some of the city's districts are also twinned to small cities or districts of other big cities, for details see the article
List of districts and towns in Budapest.




*Outline of Hungary
*List of cemeteries in Budapest
*List of famous people of Budapest
*Music of Budapest
*Urban and Suburban Transit Association (most of its activity is centred around Budapest)
*Budapest metropolitan area
*Fort Budapest
*List of films shot in Budapest



*  
*  
*  
*




*  Official homepage
*  Budapest Tourism Office
*  Public transport in Budapest
*  MÁV-Start Railway Passenger Transport Co.
*  Budapest Info
*  Budapest on Facebook
*  
*  Beautiful Budapest: Vintage Photos - slideshow by Life magazine
*  70 gigapixel photo of Budapest
*  Budapest All in One Guide
*  Personalised Budapest
*  Budapest Guide



