PERSON

George Tupou V

George Tupou V (Tongan: Siaosi Tupou V, full name: Siaosi Taufa?ahau Manumataongo Tuku?aho Tupou V; 4 May 1948 – 18 March 2012) was the King of Tonga[1] following the death of his father, Taufa?ahau Tupou IV, in 2006 until his own death.




Tupou V was born on 4 May 1948. He was the eldest son of the late King Taufa?ahau Tupou IV (1918–2006) and Queen Halaevalu Mata?aho ?Ahome?e (b. 1926). He was appointed Crown Prince on 4 May 1966. In that role, he was better known by one of his traditional chiefly titles, Tupouto?a.
Tupou V attended King's School and King's College, both in Auckland. This was followed by periods at The Leys School in Cambridge, and another school in Switzerland.[2] He also studied at Oxford University and the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in England.[3]





Though unmarried, Tupou V had a daughter born out of wedlock, 'Ilima Lei Fifita Tohi (born 1974). She married police officer Tulutulumafua i'Olotele Kalaniuvalu in 1997, and has three children. According to the Constitution of Tonga, ?Ilima is ineligible to acceed to the throne as only children born of a royal marriage may inherit the royal succession.[4]





As Crown Prince, Tupouto?a held great influence in Tongan politics, and was Minister for Foreign Affairs from 1979 to 1998. He had substantial business interests in Tonga and abroad, and is co-chairman of the Shoreline Group/Tonfön. As king, his first proclamation was that he would dispose of all his business assets as soon as reasonably possible, and in accordance with the law. Tonfön had since been sold, but the King was unable during his lifetime to rid himself of the remainder of the Shoreline Group after the 2006 Nuku'alofa riots scared potential buyers from making a deal.[original research?]



As Crown Prince, Tupouto?a held great influence in Tongan politics, and was Minister for Foreign Affairs from 1979 to 1998. He had substantial business interests in Tonga and abroad, and is co-chairman of the Shoreline Group/Tonfön. As king, his first proclamation was that he would dispose of all his business assets as soon as reasonably possible, and in accordance with the law. Tonfön had since been sold, but the King was unable during his lifetime to rid himself of the remainder of the Shoreline Group after the 2006 Nuku'alofa riots scared potential buyers from making a deal.[original research?]



The King was recognised as a descendant of the sky god Tangeroa.[5] He was sworn in as King Tupou V on 11 September 2006,[6] which also made him, from a traditional viewpoint, the 23rd Tu?i Kanokupolu (the overlords of Tongatapu).




The ceremonial aspects of Tupou V's accession took place in July and August 2008. These were initially to be held in 2007 after the six-month official mourning period for his father (as required of close relatives) and his own birthday. This was deferred after the 2006 Tonga riots as he decided to focus instead on reconstruction of the damaged capital.[7]

During the week of celebrations, two key ceremonies took place to mark Tupou's coronation. On 30 July 2008, a Taumafa Kava ceremony (Royal Kava Ring) was held on Mala?e Pangai, the open space to the east of the Royal Palace. During the ceremony, Tupou V sat on a pile of handwoven pandanus mats in an open pavilion facing the sea, while more than 200 Tongan nobles and chiefs dressed in woven skirts and sea shells circled him. He wore the traditional Tongan ta'ovala (woven mat skirt) and a garland of flowers. During this ceremony, Tupou V was formally recognised as the Tu?i Kanokupolu, and the rightful descendent of King George Tupou I who united Tonga in the 19th century. The ceremony involved having kava, hundreds of baskets of food, and seventy cooked pigs being presented to the King and the assembly of chiefs and nobles,[8]

Later that night, schoolchildren held 30,000 torches to proclaim the coronation in what is known as a tupakapakanava.[8] The traditional torch spectacle was held that time at a spot overlooking the Pacific and is an ancient honour accorded to the monarch and the royal family only.[9]

A second, European-style coronation ceremony took place on 1 August 2008 in the Centennial Chapel, Nuku’alofa.[10]The then-Anglican Archbishop of Polynesia Jabez Bryce invested George Tupou V with the Tongan regalia: the ring, sceptre and sword. In the culmination of the ceremony, Archbishop Bryce placed the Tongan Crown on monarch's head.[10] Royalty and nobility from around the world were in attendance.[original research?]



Three days before his coronation on 1 August 2008, the King announced that he would relinquish most of his power and be guided by his Prime Minister's recommendations on most matters.[11] The Prime Minister would also be in charge of day-to-day affairs.[12] Tupou will still have the powers to appoint judges and commute prison sentences.[13] The King also sold off lucrative business interests as part of the announcement.[14] In addition, the King announced that there would be parliamentary reform and elections in 2010.[15] Fielakepa, the spokesman for the royal palace, said, "The Sovereign of the only Polynesian kingdom ... is voluntarily surrendering his powers to meet the democratic aspirations of many of his people ... [The people] favour a more representative, elected Parliament. The king agrees with them."[14]

In July 2010 the government published a new electoral roll and called Tonga's 101,900 citizens to add their names to the document so that they can take part in the historic vote, which was due to be held on 25 November. He would remain head of state, but lose his executive powers, including the ability to appoint the prime minister and ministers.[16] However, it seemed certain that the Monarch would continue to appoint and administer the Judiciary of Tonga for the purposes of assuring political independence and neutrality is retained.[17]




Six months prior to his death, Tupou V had a successful surgery to remove a kidney following the discovery of a tumour.[18]

Matangi Tonga reported that George Tupou V had died from leukemia at 15:15 HKT 18 March 2012 at Queen Mary Hospital in Pokfulam, Hong Kong,[19] though governing institutions in Tonga did not immediately confirm it. His brother and Crown Prince Tupouto'a Lavaka was at the hospital when he died.[3] Television New Zealand later said that the Government of Tonga had confirmed his death.[citation needed]




A statement was due following a cabinet meeting the following day. Radio Australia also reported that Tonga's largest religious organisation, the Free Wesleyan Church, had said it would hold a prayer service at the queen mother's residence in Nuku'alofa.[18] Prime Minister Lord Tu'ivakano later made a national address calling on the people of Tonga to pray for the royal family and the country, according to Radio New Zealand.


 Australia - Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the king's death was the loss of "a great friend" to Australia and pointed to the change he led Tonga through as the "first truly democratic elections, held in November 2010, set the country on a new course."

 New Zealand - Prime Minister John Key said: "He believed that the monarchy was an instrument of change and can truly be seen as the architect of evolving democracy in Tonga. This will be his enduring legacy."[20]




On 15 September 2011, he received[21] the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Hungarian Republic from Pál Schmitt, the president of Hungary. In February 2012 the King received the Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Francis I from Prince Carlo, Duke of Castro.[original research?]
