PERSON

Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria



His Holiness Pope Shenouda III (Coptic: ???? ???? ?????? ????? ????? Papa Abba Šenout pimah šoumt; Arabic: ???? ?????????? ????? ???????; Egyptian Arabic: ?????? ?????, IPA: [el'b??b? ?(e)'nu?dæ]; born Nazeer Gayed Roufail IPA: [n?'z?i?? 'gæjjed], 3 August 1923 – 17 March 2012[1]) was the 117th Pope of Alexandria and the Patriarch of All Africa on the Holy Apostolic See of Saint Mark the Evangelist of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. He was also the head of The Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria. He was a conservative figure within the Church;[2] and also respected within the Muslim community.[3]

A graduate of Cairo University and the Coptic Orthodox Seminary, Nazeer Gayed became a monk under the name Father Antonios the Syrian after joining the Syrian Monastery of the Ever-Virgin Mary the Theotokos, where he was later elevated to the priesthood. Pope Cyril VI summoned Fr. Antonios to the patriarchate where he consecrated him General Bishop for Christian Education and as Dean of the Coptic Orthodox Theological Seminary, whereupon he assumed the name Shenouda, which was the name of a Coptic saint and two previous popes: Shenouda I (859–880) and Shenouda II (1047–1077).

Shenouda served as Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria since 14 November 1971, presiding over a worldwide expansion of the Coptic Orthodox Church. During his papacy, he appointed the first-ever bishops to preside over North American dioceses that now contain over two hundred parishes (200 in the United States, 23 in Canada and one in Mexico), up from four in 1971, as well as the first bishops in Australia and the first bishops in South America. Shenouda was known for his commitment to ecumenism and had, since the 1970s, advocated inter-denominational Christian dialogue. He devoted his writings, teachings and actions to spread and propagate for the rules of understanding, peace, dialogue and forgiveness.




Born Nazeer Gayed Roufail on 3 August 1923 in Asyut, Upper Egypt, he was the youngest of a family of eight children. Nazeer's mother died shortly after his birth. By the age of 16, Gayed was active in the Coptic Sunday School movement. Gayed was very active in his church and served as a Sunday School teacher, first at Saint Anthony's Church in Shoubra and then at Saint Mary's Church in Mahmasha.[4]

After graduating from Cairo University with a degree in history, he worked as a high school English and Social Studies teacher in Cairo by day, and attended classes at the Coptic Theological Seminary by night. Upon graduation from the seminary in 1949, he was chosen to teach New Testament Studies.[original research?]




On 18 July 1954, Nazeer joined the monastic life at the Syrian Monastery in Scetes; he was given the name of Father Antonios el-Syriani (Anthony the Syrian). From 1956 to 1962, he lived as a hermit in a cave about seven miles from the monastery, dedicating his time to meditation, prayer, and asceticism. Later, at the Syrian Monastery, he was ordained a priest. Antonios el-Syriani was among the candidates nominated for the papal throne in 1959, but Pope Cyril VI was ultimately chosen for the post.[original research?]




On 30 September 1962, Pope Cyril VI appointed him to the bishopric of Christian Education and as Dean of the Coptic Orthodox Theological Seminary, naming him Shenouda. The relevance of the name emanates from the fact that the most renowned scholar and writer in Coptic was Saint Shenouda the Archimandrite.[5]

Under Bishop Shenouda's leadership, the number of students at the Coptic Orthodox Theological Seminary tripled.[5] Bishop Shenouda was suspended in 1966 by Pope Cyril VI,[6][7] essentially because of "campaigns for change" instigated by Shenouda and his students. These campaigns, among other things, called for popular election of bishops and priests, a principle that Bishop Shenouda later applied when he became Pope of Alexandria. This conflict between Pope Cyril VI and Bishop Shenouda was later resolved.




He was enthroned as Pope Shenouda III, the 117th Pope of Alexandria and Patriarch of the See of St. Mark on 14 November 1971, nearly nine months after the death of Pope Cyril VI of Alexandria. The ceremony was the first and, as yet, the only enthroning of a Coptic Pope to take place in the new Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo.

Some Copts argue that the choice of Pope Shenouda III as Pope (and Bishop) of Alexandria was not canonical, as Shenouda was already a bishop (though without a diocese), arguably violating Canon 15 of the Council of Nicea against the translation of bishops from one See to another.[8][9] This issue caused an ongoing dispute in the Coptic Orthodox Church since 1928, and although the Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Church considered in the 1960s the General Bishops to be secretaries to the Pope in the degree of a Bishop, Pope Shenouda III was sometimes considered to be the fourth Bishop to become a Pope after Popes John XIX (1928–1942), Macarius III (1942–1944) and Joseph II (1946–1956).[10]





Shenouda had arguments with then President Anwar Sadat over both the Camp David Accords and the president's response to growing Islamism.[11] After a series of protests that led to Shenouda's arrest, he was exiled by Sadat and sent to the Nitrian Desert, to return three years after Sadat's assassination following an amnesty by Sadat's successor Hosni Mubarak.

His stance toward Israel was elucidated by his words:

From the Arabic national point we should not abandon our Palestinian brothers and our Arabic brothers by normalising our relations with the Jews...From the church point of view, Copts who go to Jerusalem betray their church in the case of "Al-Sultan Monastery" that Israel refuses to give to the Copts.

He also warned that Copts who visited Jerusalem would face excommunication on the premise that there was "no pilgrimage duty in Christianity and it is not a religious pillar, so since this visit can do harm to our national cause and [to the] Muslim and Christian people then we better not visit Jerusalem." He added that Copts should only go to Jerusalem after peace was established in the region.[12] Some of the Coptic property within the compound of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre (including the Coptic monastery known as Deir El-Sultan) was delegated to the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. Upon the application of some bishops, the Coptic Orthodox Holy Synod, based on the direction of Pope Shenouda, also decided to ask Copts not to visit Jerusalem until the Church possessions and the monastery be returned. In 2006, the Holy Synod renewed the decree, urging Copts not to visit the Christian holy places in Israel, including Jerusalem.[13]

His view on Palestinian suicide bombers was political not religious in his belief that it was a "natural reaction to the pressure and depression in which Palestinians live. They do not see any alternative but to explode themselves in the face of an enemy that uses all the means of power with no mercy."[12]

In the light of the September 11 attacks, he said of suicide bombing as a tactic that:[12]

People who support and found reasons to feel good over these incidents are doing more than one wrong thing: first, ignoring the tragedy of killing an innocent group of people. Second, not thinking about the reaction of showing they found satisfaction in the incidents. Third, they are considered accomplices in the crime. Fourth, they are committing a wrongful act not approved by religion.

On Sunday, 2 January 2000, 21 Coptic Christians in Kosheh village in Upper Egypt, 450 kilometers south of Cairo, were massacred by Salafists. On 1 December, a criminal court in Sohag governorate released without bail all 89 defendants charged in the New Year's massacre in Kosheh. Pope Shenouda III rejected the verdict openly, and told reporters, "We want to challenge this ruling. We don't accept it." As the court sentence could not be appealed, Pope Shenouda III said: "We revise this sentence by God."[14]

Following the arrest and imprisonment of Abune Tewophilos, Patriarch of Ethiopia, by the Marxist Derg regime that had deposed Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974, Pope Shenouda III refused to recognise the cleric who was installed as the Ethiopian Patriarch's successor. He, along with the Holy Synod, argued that the removal of Patriarch Abune Tewophilos was illegal and contrary to canon law as it was an act of political interference. Furthermore, in the eyes of the Church of Alexandria, Abune Tewophilos remained the legitimate Patriarch of Ethiopia.

Though Patriarch Tewophilos was said to have been executed, the government of Ethiopia did not acknowledge this had happened. Thus, the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria refused to recognise any other Patriarch as long as Abune Tewophilos' death had not been confirmed. Formal ties between the Coptics Church and Ethiopia were then severed, although they remained in full communion. Formal relations between the two churches resumed on 13 July, 2007.[15]




The papacy of Pope Shenouda III has seen an expansion of the Coptic Orthodox Church in North America. While there were only four Coptic Orthodox churches in all of North America in 1971, today there are more than two hundred.[16][17]




Pope Shenouda III was well known for his deep commitment to ecumenism. He believed that Christian unity was a matter of faith rather than of jurisdiction.[18] In 1973, Pope Shenouda III became the first Coptic Orthodox Pope of Alexandria to meet the Pope of Rome in over 1500 years. In this visit, Pope Shenouda III and Pope Paul VI signed a common declaration on the issue of Christology and agreed to further discussions on Christian unity. There have also been dialogues with various Protestant churches worldwide.

In an address he gave at an ecumenical forum during the International Week of Prayer in 1974, he declared, "The whole Christian world is anxious to see the church unite. Christian people, being fed up with divisions, are pushing their church leaders to do something about church unity and I am sure that the Holy Spirit is inspiring us."[original research?]




Pope Shenouda III has been involved in theological disagreements concerning the issue of theosis—the divinisation of the Christian who puts into practice the teachings of Christ. As result of this, Pope Shenouda III published eight booklets explaining his view of theosis. Pope Shenouda III taught others about the issue in the theological seminary of Cairo and also in the seminary of Alexandria. Following the death of Father Matta El Meskeen, who held an opposing view, Pope Shenouda III issued warnings against those views.[19][20]




In the months prior to the Pope's death, rumours had spread through Cairo’s Coptic community that he had fallen into a coma. The Holy Synod denied these reports. He regularly flew to the United States for medical treatment and, according to his doctor, Dr. Sherif Doss, he "[suffered] from kidney disease and diabetes."[21][22]

Pope Shenouda III died on 17 March 2012 (8 Paremhat 1728 in the Coptic calendar[23]) of lung and liver complications[24] at his official residence shortly after returning from medical treatement abroad.[25] He had stopped taking medication because he was too weak.[26] However, Al Jazeera English’s Coptic Egyptian reporter Sherine Tadros reported that he had been in good spirits prior to his death.[3] His political advisor, Hany Aziz, said that his death was a result of "complications in health and from old age." Following three days of laying in state the funeral will take place.[27] He is due to be buried at the Monastery of Saint Pishoy[26] in Wadi el-Natrun,[28] in accordance with his wishes.




Reactions
During the night an estimated over 100,000 mourners[25] were said to have visited his body at St. Mark's Cathedral, causing traffic jams stretching for kilometres,[27] that was taken out of a coffin and lay in a seated position on a ceremonial throne dressed in gold and red embroidered vestments, a golden mitre upon his head with a gold-tipped staff in his hand. Many Coptic figures from across the world started to return to the country as well in order to both pay their condolences and work towards the selection of a new pope.[25] Father Anglos Ishaq, the head of the church on the northern coast, said of his replacement that "it is too early to know what will happen next, but what is known is that the oldest bishop in the Holy See will be chosen as Locum tenens until a new pope gets chosen by elections from different church councils in the different provinces".[29] Metropolitan Pachomious of Beheira and Pentapolis was appointed to take over papal duties being the second most senior Metropolitan in the Holy Synod in age after Anba Mikhail, but due to his failing health and age had to delegated this duty to Metrpolitan Pachomios during the first meeting of the Holy Synod[citation needed] after the death of their Pontiff, for the interim period till a new pope would be selected.[27] Mourners from across Egypt went to Saint Mark Cathedral in Abbaseya to pay their final respects.[30] Bells also tolled in Cairo's Abbasiya district, where the Coptic Church's is primary cathedral is located.[29]

Political and religious reactions to his death came from across the Egyptian spectrum and internationally. The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces issued a statement on Facebook that expressed his wish of "preserving the unity of Egypt and the unity of its social fabric" should be achieved.[25] It added that with the loss the country should "consolidate with each other in order to pass with Egypt towards security and stability."[31] Its leader, Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, decreed three days of mourning for Christians working for state institutions.[28] The Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party issued a statement signed by the party's chairman Mohamed Morsi that read Shenouda's life was "a long journey of big contribution in various fields domestically and abroad." Prime Minister Kamal el-Ganzouri's statement read: "I give my sincere condolences to the Coptic brothers home and abroad. [He was a] national character and a symbol for patriotism and he gained wide respect and appreciation from the Egyptian people." Former Prime Minister Essam Sharaf called Shenouda as a "devout clergyman, a good citizen and a valuable leader. His memory will remain in our hearts. His vision was always that Egypt is not the country that we live in; but the country that lives in us." Upcoming presidential candidates also issued statements. Ahmed Shafiq sadi that his death was a loss to Egypt because he was a "unique religious leader and a distinguished character in the national history. Coptic church will pass this hard moment because of the great legacy of Pope Shenouda;" Amr Moussa added that Shenouda was "a great man who was working for the interests of the country. He was working for Egypt to stand as a unified front against the challenges facing the nation;" and Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh's campaign issued a statement saying that Fotouh had spoken with the Church's bishop of the youth, Bishop Moussa, to expressed his condolences to both the Coptic Church and Copts.[31]

Sheikh Ahmed el-Tayeb, the grand imam of al-Azhar University, said that "Egypt has lost one of its rare men at a sensitive moment when it most needs the wisest of its wise - their expertise and their purity of minds;"[27] he also added that he "greatly remembers his vision towards Jerusalem and its history."[25] Social media was said to be abuzz with memorials as well as criticism for Shenouda.[32]

International reactions included:

 Holy See - In a message of condolence to Copts, the Roman Catholic Pope Benedict XVI said: "I recall with gratitude his commitment to Christian Unity, his memorable visit to my predecessor Pope Paul VI, and their signing of the Joint Declaration of Faith in the Incarnation of the Son of God together in Rome, on 10 May 1973, as well as his Cairo meeting with Pope John Paul II during the Great Jubilee of the Incarnation, on 24 February 2000. I can say how the Catholic Church as a whole shares the grief that afflicts the Orthodox Copts, and how she stands in fervent prayer asking that He, who is the Resurrection and the Life, might welcome his faithful servant."[33] He offered prayers for Shenouda on the day of his death[34] and was said to share the pain of Copts over Shenouda's death.[35]

Director of the Holy See Press Office Federico Lombardi said that Benedict XVI desired that "the Lord welcomes this great pastor" and add that "we will never forget the meeting between Pope Shenouda III and Pope John Paul II in Cairo on the occasion of his pilgrimage to Mount Sinai [in 2000]..."[34] A statement attributed to him read: "The Catholic Church [sic] shares in the grief and prayers of Coptic Christians in mourning the loss of their spiritual leader...May the Lord welcome this great shepherd and give him the reward he deserves for his service."[27][36]

 Iran - Deputy Foreign Minister Hossein Amir-Abdullahian praised Shenouda for "constructive and lasting efforts to achieve peace and justice" and offered his condolences to the Coptic Orthodox Church and Copts.[37]

 United States - President Barack Obama said of Shenouda that "we will remember Pope Shenouda III as a man of deep faith, a leader of a great faith, and an advocate for unity and reconciliation...a beloved leader of Egypt's Coptic Christians and an advocate for tolerance and religious dialogue."[28] He also added that "Michelle and I are saddened to learn of the passing of Coptic Christian Pope Shenouda III, a beloved leader of Egypt’s Coptic Christians and an advocate for tolerance and religious dialogue. We stand alongside Coptic Christians and Egyptians as they honor his contributions in support of peace and cooperation. [His] commitment to Egypt’s national unity is also a testament to what can be accomplished when people of all religions and creeds work together."[31]

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton expressed her condolences on behalf of the United States to the Egyptian people[38] and said: "As we reflect on his life and legacy, we reaffirm our support to the future peace and prosperity of Egypt. Our thoughts and prayers are with the Egyptian people and all those who mourn Pope Shenouda III."[26]
