LANGUAGE

Altay language

Altay (also Altai) is a language of the Turkic group of languages. It is an official language of Altai Republic, Russia. The language was called Oyrot prior to 1948. There were ca. 67,900 people speaking this language in 2002.




Due to its isolated position in the Altay Mountains and contact with surrounding languages, the classification of Altay within the Turkic languages has often been disputed. Because of its geographic proximity to the Shor and Khakas languages, some classifications place it in a Northern Turkic sub-group.[4] Due to certain similarities with Kyrgyz, it has been grouped with the Kypchak languages. A more recent classification by Talat Tekin places Southern Altay in its own sub-group within Turkic and groups the Northern Altay dialects with Lower Chulym and the Kondoma dialect of Shor.[5]




Altay is spoken primarily in the Altai Republic (Southern Altay) and Altai Krai (Northern Altay).

Along with Russian, Altay is an official language of the Altai Republic. The official language is based on the Southern dialect spoken by the group called the Altay-kiži, however in the few years it has also spread to the Northern Altai Republic.

Altay is usually divided into Northern and Southern dialects, which are then further broken down into a number of sub-dialects. The breakdown of these dialects is as follows[6]:

Southern Altay


Altay proper

Mayma

Telengit

Tölös

Chuy

Teleut

Northern Altay

Tuba

Kumandy

Turachak

Solton

Starobardinian

Chalkan (also called Kuu, Lebedin)

The sounds of the Altay language vary from dialect to dialect.

The voiced palatal plosive /?/ varies greatly from dialect to dialect, especially in initial position. Form of the word ??? "no" include [coq] (Kuu dialect) and [joq] (Kumandy). Even within dialects this phoneme varies greatly.[7][8]

There are eight vowels in Altay. These vowels may be long or short.

The language was written with the Latin script from 1928–1938, but has used Cyrillic (with the addition of 4 extra letters: ??, ??, ??, ??) since 1938.